{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2639
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-BoldItalicMT;\f4\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT;\f5\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red11\green76\blue180;\red53\green91\blue183;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c1961\c38824\c75686;\cssrgb\c26667\c44706\c76863;
}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11520\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf2 Hubert Parry\'92s 
\f3\i Scenes from Prometheus Unbound
\f2\i0  (1880): 
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 A Selection of Piano Recordings by and Interview with Jennifer Castleton
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 ***On the 140
\fs20 \super th
\fs24 \nosupersub  Anniversary of Parry\'92s Composition and the Bicentenary of Percy Shelley\'92s 
\f4\i Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0 ***
\f1\fs32 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0https://archive.org/details/castleton_prometheus_unbound\

\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 Omar F. Miranda, University of San Francisco 
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Sir Charles Hubert Hastings Parry (1848-1918) is best known today for \'93Jerusalem,\'94 the song he composed in 1916 based on the verse preface of William Blake\'92s epic poem, 
\f4\i Milton
\f0\i0 . What initially circulated as an inspirational tune during the World War I era eventually became a public sensation. Parry\'92s musical adaptation rose in popularity as a church hymn and then more broadly as the unofficial national anthem in the United Kingdom. Today one can find performances of it virtually anywhere \'96 from official British state ceremonies to sporting events such as cricket matches; it is, in fact, recognized as the \'93anthem of English cricket.\'94 According to a BBC podcast from October 2016, the song is \'93held in the hearts and memories of people from different backgrounds and cultures\'94 (Gregor).
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Setting original music to Romantic poetry was no novelty for Parry. Some four decades earlier during his years of study at Oxford University, he was steeped in the writings of Samuel Coleridge, Percy Shelley, and John Keats.\cf3 \super \ul \ulc3 [1]\cf2 \nosupersub \ulnone  In 1880, he completed a musical adaptation of Shelley\'92s 
\f4\i Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0 , a fitting poetic choice for an orchestral choral cantata that spoke to Parry\'92s radical political commitments at the time. As Parry\'92s biographer, Jeremy Dibble, has noted, \'93in the summer of 1879 [Parry] had returned to the re-reading of Shelley, whose poetry he had read avidly as a student at Oxford, and found that the radical ideology of 
\f4\i Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0  chimed with his present political, aesthetic and musical state of mind\'94 (289). Indeed, Parry\'92s composition was a progressive piece of music that marked the start of a renaissance in English musical history. Parry\'92s adaptation is regarded as extraordinarily avant-garde and experimental, especially given its many Wagnerian influences. According to Dibble:
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li960\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 Parry attempted to emulate the new style of seamless Wagnerian declamation where the voice, as a counterpoint, interwove with the polyphony of the orchestra in a larger symphonic structure ultimately conceived as an instrumental canvas. It is bold music, rebellious in tone, harmony and demeanour, with colourful orchestration and a rhetoric never before heard in an English composer (290).
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Despite its consequential place in musical history, Parry\'92s cantata has been seldomly performed. The debut performance of 
\f4\i Scenes from Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0  took place on September 7, 1880 at the Three Choirs Festival in Gloucester Cathedral; a second performance occurred there on May 17, 1881. Another performance by the Bach Choir took place at St. James\'92s Hall in London on 19 February 1885; in its review, 
\f4\i The Musical Standard
\f0\i0  noted Parry\'92s \'93dreary illustrations\'94 of a poem \'93sadly inferior . . . to the immortal tragedy of Aeschylos [sic], \'91Prometheus Victus\'92\'94 (132). More recently, a centenary BBC performance with conductor Vernon Handley was broadcasted on September 24, 1980.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 The present project, which was sponsored by the Romantics Bicentennials collaboration between the Keats-Shelley Association of America and the Byron Society of America, is intended to commemorate the bicentenary of Percy Shelley\'92s 
\f4\i Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0  alongside the 140
\fs26\fsmilli13333 \super th
\fs32 \nosupersub  Anniversary of Parry\'92s 
\f4\i Scenes from Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0  (1880). Below are five piano selections from Parry\'92s music, which have been produced and recorded by the musician, Jennifer Castleton. Additionally, there is a pdf copy of Parry\'92s libretto from his 1880 work, an original musical composition of Percy Shelley\'92s \'93Life of Life\'94 hymn from 
\f4\i Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0  by Castleton, and, finally, an interview with Castleton (conducted by Omar F. Miranda).
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf2 Works Cited
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li960\fi-960\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 Dibble, Jeremy. \'93\'91I pant for the music which is divine\'92: Shelley\'92s Poetry and the Musical Imagination.\'94 
\f4\i The Reception of P.B. Shelley in Europe
\f0\i0 , edited by Susanne Schmid and Michael Rossington, Bloomsbury, 2008.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Gregor, Karen. \'93Jerusalem: Series 23.\'94 
\f4\i Soul Music: A BBC Sounds Podcast
\f0\i0 , BBC, 18 Oct. 2016. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/b07z43fm"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/b07z43fm}}
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Wyatt-Smith, B. F. 
\f4\i The Musical Standard
\f0\i0 ,\'a0vol.\'a028,\'a0no.1074,\'a0Feb. 28, 1885, p. 132.
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f4\i \cf4 Scenes from Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0  by Hubert Parry (PDF Copy)
\f1 \cf2 \

\f0 \cf4 \'a0
\f1 \cf2 \

\f0 \cf4 Five Recorded Parts from
\f4\i  Scenes from Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0 :
\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li960\fi-480\partightenfactor0
\cf4 \'b7
\f0\fs18\fsmilli9333 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0 
\fs32 Introduction (Jennifer Castleton)
\f1 \cf2 \
\cf4 \'b7
\f0\fs18\fsmilli9333 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0 
\fs32 Prometheus\'92s Opening Monologue (Jennifer Castleton)
\f1 \cf2 \
\cf4 \'b7
\f0\fs18\fsmilli9333 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0 
\fs32 The \'93Life of Life\'94 Hymn (Jennifer Castleton)
\f1 \cf2 \
\cf4 \'b7
\f0\fs18\fsmilli9333 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0 
\fs32 Jupiter on his Throne (Jennifer Castleton)
\f1 \cf2 \
\cf4 \'b7
\f0\fs18\fsmilli9333 \'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0 
\fs32 Finale (Jennifer Castleton)
\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f2\b \cf2 Interview with Jennifer Castleton 
\f1\b0 \

\f2\b (conducted by Omar F. Miranda)
\f1\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \

\f4\i OFM: Jennifer, first I\'92d like to thank you very much for all the hard work you have put into this commemorative project. I thought I would begin by asking you to tell us a little bit about yourself and your interest in this project.\'a0
\f1\i0 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 JC: My name is Jennifer Castleton and I am a musician, among other things. Music is something that gets me through life, it brings me meaning, dimension and joy. It has been a part of my life from a young age, where I began to learn the piano and participated in singing groups. I have spent hours and hours playing the piano with pieces ranging from classical to pop music. In my early twenties, I began experimenting with creating my own music, and now I spend hours and hours writing music.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 My interest in this project came from you! I was unaware of this particular piece of music. As you said, a recording is nowhere to be found, so it is definitely not something I would have come across on my own. However I wrote a song entitled 
\f4\i Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0 , based on a portion of Shelley\'92s play
\f4\i .
\f0\i0  I posted it on the internet, where you found it. Thankfully, you contacted me, sharing with me Hubert Parry\'92s musical version of the play. Upon further research, I was surprised to learn that this work, in its time, was a big deal, so much so, that it was responsible for propelling Parry into his musical career. And yet there is no recording anywhere. How could something so significant in its day have become so obscure? For me, this wasn\'92t just about performing a piece of music, it was about bringing to light something that once had meaning, and something that I believe still has meaning to the musical world and to society as a whole. My hope is that my piano recordings will help make Parry\'92s music known to professional musicians, who will then bring it again to the world.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f4\i OFM: I know you have invested several hours into recording this music, and we are very grateful. How long did all of these recorded pieces take you? And, for the person not too familiar with such particulars of music, why did it take so long?
\f1\i0 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 JC: I\'92d be estimating here, but I believe it took me at least 100 hours just in practicing this music leading up to recording. It\'92s easy to lose track of time when I\'92m practicing as I can get so focused on the music. Usually in a single sitting, I could practice 1-3 hours depending on how much I was trying to get done or how much time I had available.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 There are so many components that go into performing a single piece of music. It\'92s not just about getting all the notes right. There\'92s the rhythm and speed of the music. There\'92s the dynamics, how loud or soft the music needs to be played. There\'92s my touch\'97how I attack each note physically with my fingertips. Also important is ensuring that notes aren\'92t run together, or that certain notes don\'92t dominate over others in order to maintain the integrity of the music. These kinds of things can make or break the feeling that needs to be communicated as the piece is performed, so a lot of times, a single portion of music needs to be practiced again and again, each time focusing on a different component.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f4\i OFM: What were your immediate impressions of Parry\'92s musical composition? And did those impressions change after you completed these recordings?
\f1\i0 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 JC: Complex and intense. The timing is complex, the harmonies are complex, and there is constant movement, even in the slower and quieter portions of the music. Much of this music was not simple or intuitive. There was never a part I felt I could get an easy break. All of it was pretty intense and required a lot of focus and energy.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 To be honest, just how intense and how involved this music was only increased as I practiced and came to know the music better. As I focused on those different components that I mentioned earlier, I discovered how the feel and difficulty of the music was different than I initially thought. This happened a lot when I focused on the tempo which is the speed at which the music is played. When I sight-read, or initially ran through the music, I played it at what I thought the speed was, but as I looked at it more in detail, I would realize that a certain portion would need to be performed much faster, or sometimes much slower, than I thought, and that would completely change the feel of the music...usually adding a lot more intensity!
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f4\i OFM: If this were a full-on musical production, what would it look like? What would it include?\'a0
\f1\i0 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 JC: To have this performed as it should be, there would be a full orchestra including strings, woodwinds, brass, and percussion sections. This includes instruments such as violins, cellos, flutes, clarinets, trumpets, tubas, and drums to name a few.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 And of course, this music was not intended to be purely instrumental. It was meant to be sung. There is meant to be a full chorus of men and women singing up to four different parts simultaneously. Particular characters, such as Prometheus and Jupiter, are sung by soloists. Due to the nature of the music, this isn\'92t something that could be pulled off by a high school or community choir. It would take people who were trained and experienced, having a significant amount of musical knowledge\'97particularly when it came to the solos. This music really is grandiose and operatic in scope.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 The piano part I played was challenging. But imagine all of that being shared by different instruments and vocalists. It would be so much more stimulating, so much richer in sound, and so much more intense. What I did is such a small representation of what Parry was intending this music to be.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f4\i OFM: A few years back, you recorded your own original \'96 and beautiful! \'96 music that you set to the \'93Life of Life\'94 hymn from Act II of Percy Shelley\'92s Prometheus Unbound (link provided below). Can you tell us how and why you decided to create this? What were your musical influences, if any? How does your piece differ from Parry\'92s adaptation of it?
\f1\i0 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'93Life of Life\'94 from Percy Shelley\'92s 
\f4\i Prometheus Unbound
\f1\i0 \

\f0 Original Music by Jennifer Castleton ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LkKmxBoMHnU"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul YouTube link}})
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 JC: I had actually never read, or was even aware of Shelley\'92s 
\f4\i Prometheus Unbound
\f0\i0  when I began writing the piece. I was having a creative moment on the piano, and a strain of music came out that I really resonated with, but I wasn\'92t sure of where to go with it. I felt it definitely had a Romantic feel. I could picture all of the things that I felt accompanied the Romantic Era. For music, that meant there was a lot of feeling to it. The sound was less about being technical or following a particular form, and more about being emotional. I imagined there being words, but I didn\'92t know what they were. I almost wanted to make some up, but knew that I was not capable of creating Romantic-style poetry that could be taken seriously. I was going to let it lie, but then I felt like I needed to try just a little bit harder. On my bookshelf was a literature book from college that had works spanning through a particular period of time. I opened it up for inspiration, and the first thing I read was \'93Life of Life! thy lips enkindle With their love the breath between them;,\'94 and it fit exactly\'97the rhythm and the overall feeling. It was exactly what I was looking for. From there I used the poem as a focus for the music.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Initially when I wrote this piece, I was just experimenting on the piano. All influences were less conscious than they were unconscious. As far as influences go, I have always loved Classical as well as Romantic Era music. These include pieces by Mozart, Haydn, Beethoven, Brahms, and Chopin. Chopin is really a good indication of Romantic music to me. This is the kind of music I would love to just sit and play for the joy of it, so I\'92d say my influence for this piece came from hours and hours of playing the music that I loved, and it just became a part of me somewhere\'97enough to be made manifest in this song I wrote.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 My interpretation of the Life of Life poem is very different than that of Parry\'92s. The melody is simple. The rhythm is steady and straight-forward. Its emotion is in its simplicity.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Parry\'92s is very complex. There\'92s much more going on between the vocals and the accompaniment of the instruments. The harmonies are more complex, the rhythm is more complex. It\'92s more of a journey as it changes theme, tempo, melody and dynamics throughout the piece. Its emotion comes from the extremes in the music, which is also very beautiful.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 Works Cited
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Dibble, Jeremy. \'91I pant for the music which is divine\'92: Shelley\'92s Poetry and the Musical Imagination.\'94 
\f4\i The Reception of P.B. Shelley in Europe
\f0\i0 . Ed. Susanne Schmid and Michael Rossington. London: Bloomsbury, 2008. Print.
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Gregor, Karen. \'93Jerusalem: Series 23\'94 Soul Music: A BBC Sounds Podcast. BBC, 18 Oct. 2016. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/b07z43fm"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/b07z43fm}}
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 Wyatt-Smith, B F. 
\f4\i The Musical Standard
\f0\i0 ,\'a0vol.\'a028,\'a0no.1074,\'a0Feb. 28, 1885, p 132
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \

\f0 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf2 \'a0
\f1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f5\fs24 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs26\fsmilli13333 \cf3 \super \ul [1]\cf2 \nosupersub \ulnone  Parry curiously followed Percy Shelley\'92s own educational trajectory in part, attending Eton and later Oxford University (from which Shelley would be expelled for circulating his co-written pamphlet, 
\f4\i The Necessity of Atheism
\f1\i0 \
}